src/agentrules/core/utils/file_creation/templates/PLANS.md, before:

# Codex Execution Plans (ExecPlans)

This document describes the requirements for an execution plan ("ExecPlan"), a design document that a coding agent can follow to deliver a working feature or system change. Treat the reader as a complete beginner to this repository: they have only the current working tree and the single ExecPlan file you provide. There is no memory of prior plans and no external context.

## ExecPlan identity, naming, and registry metadata (required)

Every ExecPlan must have a stable, canonical ID and a machine-readable metadata header at the top of the plan. This enables consistent association across:

- ExecPlans
- Milestones
- Branches / PRs / commits
- A lightweight registry file at `.agent/exec_plans/registry.json`

### Canonical ExecPlan ID

Use this exact format:

- `EP-YYYYMMDD-NNN`

Where `NNN` is a zero-padded daily sequence number (001–999). Example: `EP-20260117-014`.

This ID is the primary key for the plan. It must not change after creation.

### File location and filename convention

ExecPlans are created under `.agent/exec_plans/<short_slug>/`:

- `.agent/exec_plans/<short_slug>/EP-YYYYMMDD-NNN_<short-slug>.md`

Example:

- `.agent/exec_plans/auth_refresh/EP-20260117-014_auth-refresh.md`

The slug is a short, human-friendly hint. The ID is the real identity.

### Required YAML front matter (registry source of truth)

Every ExecPlan file must begin with a YAML front matter block as the very first bytes in the file. It must start with `---` and end with `---`. Keep the YAML simple: scalars and short lists only. Avoid multiline strings.

Required keys and allowed values:

- `id` (required): `EP-YYYYMMDD-NNN` (must match the filename ID)
- `title` (required): short, action-oriented title
- `status` (required): `planned | active | paused | done | archived`
- `kind` (required): `feature | refactor | bugfix | migration | infra | spike | perf | docs | tests`
- `domain` (required): `backend | frontend | console | infra | cross-cutting`
- `owner` (required): `@handle` (e.g. codex)
- `created` (required): `YYYY-MM-DD`
- `updated` (required): `YYYY-MM-DD` (must be bumped when the plan is materially revised)
- `tags` (optional): short list of labels
- `touches` (optional): `api | db | ui | cli | agents | ops | security | tests | docs` (list)
- `risk` (optional): `low | med | high`
- `breaking` (optional): `true | false`
- `migration` (optional): `true | false`
- `links` (optional): map with keys like `issue`, `pr`, `docs`
- `depends_on` (optional): list of ExecPlan IDs this plan depends on
- `supersedes` (optional): list of ExecPlan IDs this plan replaces

Example front matter:

    ---
    id: EP-20260117-014
    title: "Refactor auth refresh flow"
    status: planned
    kind: refactor
    domain: backend
    owner: "@trevor"
    created: 2026-01-17
    updated: 2026-01-17
    tags: [auth, sessions]
    touches: [api, db]
    risk: med
    breaking: false
    migration: false
    links:
      issue: ""
      pr: ""
      docs: ""
    depends_on: []
    supersedes: []
    ---

## How to use ExecPlans and PLANS.md

When authoring an executable specification (ExecPlan), follow PLANS.md to the letter. If it is not in your context, refresh your memory by reading the entire PLANS.md file. Be thorough in reading (and re-reading) source material to produce an accurate specification. When creating a spec, start from the skeleton and flesh it out as you do your research. Create the spec within `.agent/exec_plans/<short_slug>/`.

When implementing an executable specification (ExecPlan), do not prompt the user for "next steps"; simply proceed to the next milestone. Keep all sections up to date, add or split entries in the list at every stopping point to affirmatively state the progress made and next steps. Resolve ambiguities autonomously, and commit frequently.

When discussing an executable specification (ExecPlan), record decisions in a log in the spec for posterity; it should be unambiguously clear why any change to the specification was made. ExecPlans are living documents, and it should always be possible to restart from only the ExecPlan and no other work.

When researching a design with challenging requirements or significant unknowns, use milestones to implement proof of concepts and toy implementations that validate feasibility. Read the source code of libraries by finding or acquiring them, research deeply, and include prototypes to guide a fuller implementation.

## Requirements

NON-NEGOTIABLE REQUIREMENTS:

- Every ExecPlan must be fully self-contained. Self-contained means that in its current form it contains all knowledge and instructions needed for a novice to succeed.
- Every ExecPlan is a living document. Contributors are required to revise it as progress is made, as discoveries occur, and as design decisions are finalized. Each revision must remain fully self-contained.
- Every ExecPlan must enable a complete novice to implement the feature end-to-end without prior knowledge of this repo.
- Every ExecPlan must produce a demonstrably working behavior, not merely code changes to "meet a definition".
- Every ExecPlan must define every term of art in plain language or do not use it.

Purpose and intent come first. Begin by explaining, in a few sentences, why the work matters from a user's perspective: what someone can do after this change that they could not do before, and how to see it working. Then guide the reader through the exact steps to achieve that outcome, including what to edit, what to run, and what they should observe.

The agent executing your plan can list files, read files, search, run the project, and run tests. It does not know any prior context and cannot infer what you meant from earlier milestones. Repeat any assumption you rely on. Do not point to external blogs or docs; if knowledge is required, embed it in the plan itself in your own words. If an ExecPlan builds upon a prior ExecPlan and that file is checked in, incorporate it by reference. If it is not, you must include all relevant context from that plan.

## Formatting

Format and envelope are simple and strict.

1) YAML front matter is required and must be first.

The ExecPlan must begin with the YAML front matter described above. It is part of the plan and must remain accurate. When the plan is materially revised, update the `updated` date and record key decisions in the `Decision Log`.

2) ExecPlan body format.

Each ExecPlan must be one single fenced code block labeled as `md` that begins and ends with triple backticks. Do not nest additional triple-backtick code fences inside. When you need to show commands, transcripts, diffs, or code, present them as indented blocks within that single fence. Use indentation for clarity rather than code fences inside an ExecPlan to avoid prematurely closing the ExecPlan's code fence. Use two newlines after every heading, use `#` and `##` and so on, and correct syntax for ordered and unordered lists.

When writing an ExecPlan to a Markdown (.md) file where the content of the file is only the single ExecPlan, you should omit the triple backticks. The YAML front matter still remains at the top of the file.

Write in plain prose. Prefer sentences over lists. Avoid checklists, tables, and long enumerations unless brevity would obscure meaning. Checklists are permitted only in the `Progress` section, where they are mandatory. Narrative sections must remain prose-first.

## Guidelines

Self-containment and plain language are paramount. If you introduce a phrase that is not ordinary English ("daemon", "middleware", "RPC gateway", "filter graph"), define it immediately and remind the reader how it manifests in this repository (for example, by naming the files or commands where it appears). Do not say "as defined previously" or "according to the architecture doc." Include the needed explanation here, even if you repeat yourself.

Avoid common failure modes. Do not rely on undefined jargon. Do not describe "the letter of a feature" so narrowly that the resulting code compiles but does nothing meaningful. Do not outsource key decisions to the reader. When ambiguity exists, resolve it in the plan itself and explain why you chose that path. Err on the side of over-explaining user-visible effects and under-specifying incidental implementation details.

Anchor the plan with observable outcomes. State what the user can do after implementation, the commands to run, and the outputs they should see. Acceptance should be phrased as behavior a human can verify ("after starting the server, navigating to http://localhost:8080/health returns HTTP 200 with body OK") rather than internal attributes ("added a HealthCheck struct"). If a change is internal, explain how its impact can still be demonstrated (for example, by running tests that fail before and pass after, and by showing a scenario that uses the new behavior).

Specify repository context explicitly. Name files with full repository-relative paths, name functions and modules precisely, and describe where new files should be created. If touching multiple areas, include a short orientation paragraph that explains how those parts fit together so a novice can navigate confidently. When running commands, show the working directory and exact command line. When outcomes depend on environment, state the assumptions and provide alternatives when reasonable.

Be idempotent and safe. Write the steps so they can be run multiple times without causing damage or drift. If a step can fail halfway, include how to retry or adapt. If a migration or destructive operation is necessary, spell out backups or safe fallbacks. Prefer additive, testable changes that can be validated as you go.

Validation is not optional. Include instructions to run tests, to start the system if applicable, and to observe it doing something useful. Describe comprehensive testing for any new features or capabilities. Include expected outputs and error messages so a novice can tell success from failure. Where possible, show how to prove that the change is effective beyond compilation (for example, through a small end-to-end scenario, a CLI invocation, or an HTTP request/response transcript). State the exact test commands appropriate to the project’s toolchain and how to interpret their results.

Capture evidence. When your steps produce terminal output, short diffs, or logs, include them inside the single fenced block as indented examples. Keep them concise and focused on what proves success. If you need to include a patch, prefer file-scoped diffs or small excerpts that a reader can recreate by following your instructions rather than pasting large blobs.

## Milestones

Milestones are narrative, not bureaucracy. If you break the work into milestones, introduce each with a brief paragraph that describes the scope, what will exist at the end of the milestone that did not exist before, the commands to run, and the acceptance you expect to observe. Keep it readable as a story: goal, work, result, proof. Progress and milestones are distinct: milestones tell the story, progress tracks granular work. Both must exist. Never abbreviate a milestone merely for the sake of brevity; do not leave out details that could be crucial to a future implementation.

Each milestone must be independently verifiable and incrementally implement the overall goal of the execution plan.

### Milestone IDs and filenames

Milestones are associated to ExecPlans via the ExecPlan ID.

Milestone ID format:

- `EP-YYYYMMDD-NNN/MS###` (per-plan sequence, zero-padded)

Milestone filename format:

- `.agent/exec_plans/<short_slug>/milestones/active/EP-YYYYMMDD-NNN_MS###_<short-slug>.md`
- Archive to: `.agent/exec_plans/<short_slug>/milestones/archive/YYYY/MM/DD/EP-YYYYMMDD-NNN_MS###_<short-slug>.md`

### Instructions for Creating Milestones

- Base your milestone on the template shown in `.agent/templates/MILESTONE_TEMPLATE.md`.
- Create your milestone within `.agent/exec_plans/<short_slug>/milestones/active/`.
- When your milestone is complete, archive it in `.agent/exec_plans/<short_slug>/milestones/archive/`.

## Living plans and design decisions

- ExecPlans are living documents. As you make key design decisions, update the plan to record both the decision and the thinking behind it. Record all decisions in the `Decision Log` section.
- ExecPlans must contain and maintain a `Progress` section, a `Surprises & Discoveries` section, a `Decision Log`, and an `Outcomes & Retrospective` section. These are not optional.
- When you discover optimizer behavior, performance tradeoffs, unexpected bugs, or inverse/unapply semantics that shaped your approach, capture those observations in the `Surprises & Discoveries` section with short evidence snippets (test output is ideal).
- If you change course mid-implementation, document why in the `Decision Log` and reflect the implications in `Progress`.
- At completion of a major task or the full plan, write an `Outcomes & Retrospective` entry summarizing what was achieved, what remains, and lessons learned.

## Prototyping milestones and parallel implementations

It is acceptable—and often encouraged—to include explicit prototyping milestones when they de-risk a larger change. Examples: adding a low-level operator to a dependency to validate feasibility, or exploring two composition orders while measuring optimizer effects. Keep prototypes additive and testable. Clearly label the scope as "prototyping"; describe how to run and observe results; and state the criteria for promoting or discarding the prototype.

Prefer additive code changes followed by subtractions that keep tests passing. Parallel implementations (e.g., keeping an adapter alongside an older path during migration) are fine when they reduce risk or enable tests to continue passing during a large migration. Describe how to validate both paths and how to retire one safely with tests. When working with multiple new libraries or feature areas, consider creating spikes that evaluate feasibility independently, proving that the external library performs as expected and implements the features needed in isolation.

## Skeleton of a Good ExecPlan

```md
---
id: EP-YYYYMMDD-NNN
title: "<Short, action-oriented title>"
status: planned
kind: feature
domain: backend
owner: "@handle-or-team"
created: YYYY-MM-DD
updated: YYYY-MM-DD
tags: []
touches: []
risk: low
breaking: false
migration: false
links:
  issue: ""
  pr: ""
  docs: ""
depends_on: []
supersedes: []
---

# <Short, action-oriented description>

This ExecPlan is a living document. The sections `Progress`, `Surprises & Discoveries`, `Decision Log`, and `Outcomes & Retrospective` must be kept up to date as work proceeds.

If PLANS.md is checked into the repo, reference the path to that file here from the repository root and note that this document must be maintained in accordance with PLANS.md.

## Purpose / Big Picture

Explain in a few sentences what someone gains after this change and how they can see it working. State the user-visible behavior you will enable.

## Progress

Use a list with checkboxes to summarize granular steps. Every stopping point must be documented here, even if it requires splitting a partially completed task into two ("done" vs. "remaining"). This section must always reflect the actual current state of the work.

- [x] (2025-10-01 13:00Z) Example completed step.
- [ ] Example incomplete step.
- [ ] Example partially completed step (completed: X; remaining: Y).

Use timestamps to measure rates of progress.

## Surprises & Discoveries

Document unexpected behaviors, bugs, optimizations, or insights discovered during implementation. Provide concise evidence.

- Observation: …
  Evidence: …

## Decision Log

Record every decision made while working on the plan in the format:

- Decision: …
  Rationale: …
  Date/Author: …

## Outcomes & Retrospective

Summarize outcomes, gaps, and lessons learned at major milestones or at completion. Compare the result against the original purpose.

## Context and Orientation

Describe the current state relevant to this task as if the reader knows nothing. Name the key files and modules by full path. Define any non-obvious term you will use. Do not refer to prior plans.

## Plan of Work

Describe, in prose, the sequence of edits and additions. For each edit, name the file and location (function, module) and what to insert or change. Keep it concrete and minimal.

## Concrete Steps

State the exact commands to run and where to run them (working directory). When a command generates output, show a short expected transcript so the reader can compare. This section must be updated as work proceeds.

## Validation and Acceptance

Describe how to start or exercise the system and what to observe. Phrase acceptance as behavior, with specific inputs and outputs. If tests are involved, say "run <project’s test command> and expect <N> passed; the new test <name> fails before the change and passes after>".

## Idempotence and Recovery

If steps can be repeated safely, say so. If a step is risky, provide a safe retry or rollback path. Keep the environment clean after completion.

## Artifacts and Notes

Include the most important transcripts, diffs, or snippets as indented examples. Keep them concise and focused on what proves success.

## Interfaces and Dependencies

Be prescriptive. Name the libraries, modules, and services to use and why. Specify the types, traits/interfaces, and function signatures that must exist at the end of the milestone. Prefer stable names and paths such as `crate::module::function` or `package.submodule.Interface`.

Example:

In crates/foo/planner.rs, define:

    pub trait Planner {
        fn plan(&self, observed: &Observed) -> Vec<Action>;
    }

---

When you revise a plan, you must ensure your changes are comprehensively reflected across all sections, including the living document sections. Update the YAML `updated` date, add an entry to `Decision Log` when appropriate, and write a short note at the bottom of the plan describing the change and the reason why.

Commit message:

feat(cli): add execplan new command group
Why
- Creating ExecPlan files was still manual even after adding registry tooling.
- A dedicated command keeps creation concerns separate from registry management and makes the workflow consistent.

What changed
- Added `agentrules execplan new` in `src/agentrules/cli/commands/execplan.py`.
- Wired the new command group into the main CLI app in `src/agentrules/cli/app.py`.
- Added `src/agentrules/core/utils/execplan_creator.py` for ID generation, slug normalization, sequence discovery, template rendering, and optional registry refresh.
- Added template file `src/agentrules/core/utils/file_creation/templates/EXECPLAN_TEMPLATE.md` for generated ExecPlan content.
- Added tests in `tests/unit/test_execplan_creator.py` and `tests/unit/test_execplan_cli.py`.
- Updated README CLI quick-reference to include `agentrules execplan new`.

Impact
- Users can now create a valid ExecPlan file with one command.
- New plans can automatically refresh `.agent/exec_plans/registry.json` (default behavior), or skip it with `--no-update-registry`.
- Sequence generation ignores milestone files and enforces `EP-YYYYMMDD-NNN` progression.

Tests
- python -m unittest tests.unit.test_execplan_creator tests.unit.test_execplan_cli -v
- python -m unittest tests.unit.test_execplan_registry tests.unit.test_execplan_registry_cli tests.unit.test_cli -v
- ruff check src/agentrules/core/utils/execplan_creator.py src/agentrules/cli/commands/execplan.py src/agentrules/cli/app.py tests/unit/test_execplan_creator.py tests/unit/test_execplan_cli.py
- pyright src/agentrules/core/utils/execplan_creator.py src/agentrules/cli/commands/execplan.py
- python -c "import agentrules"
- python -m agentrules execplan --help
- python -m agentrules execplan new "Sample Plan" --root /tmp/agentrules_execplan_demo --date 20260207 --no-update-registry

Notes
- `execplan-registry` remains focused on registry lifecycle only; `execplan` owns document creation.

src/agentrules/core/utils/file_creation/templates/PLANS.md, after:

# Codex Execution Plans (ExecPlans)

This document describes the requirements for an execution plan ("ExecPlan"), a design document that a coding agent can follow to deliver a working feature or system change. Treat the reader as a complete beginner to this repository: they have only the current working tree and the single ExecPlan file you provide. There is no memory of prior plans and no external context.

## ExecPlan identity, naming, and registry metadata (required)

Every ExecPlan must have a stable, canonical ID and a machine-readable metadata header at the top of the plan. This enables consistent association across:

- ExecPlans
- Milestones
- Branches / PRs / commits
- A registry file at `.agent/exec_plans/registry.json`

### Canonical ExecPlan ID

Use this exact format:

- `EP-YYYYMMDD-NNN`

Where `NNN` is a zero-padded daily sequence number (001–999). Example: `EP-20260117-014`.

This ID is the primary key for the plan. It must not change after creation.

### File location and filename convention

ExecPlans are created under `.agent/exec_plans/<short-slug>/`:

- `.agent/exec_plans/<short-slug>/EP-YYYYMMDD-NNN_<short-slug>.md`

Example:

- `.agent/exec_plans/auth_refresh/EP-20260117-014_auth-refresh.md`

The slug is a short, human-friendly hint. The ID is the real identity.

### ExecPlan Creation

Create an ExecPlan using `agentrules execplan new "<title>" --slug <short-slug>` (e.g. `agentrules execplan new "Auth Refresh" --slug auth-refresh`). If --slug is omitted, a slug is derived from the title. The file is generated under `.agent/exec_plans/<short-slug>/` as `EP-YYYYMMDD-NNN_<short-slug>.md`.

### Registry Creation & Update

- Create the `registry.json` using `agentrules execplan-registry build`
- Update the `registry.json` using `agentrules execplan-registry update`

### Required YAML front matter (registry source of truth)

Every ExecPlan file must begin with a YAML front matter block as the very first bytes in the file. It must start with `---` and end with `---`. Keep the YAML simple: scalars and short lists only. Avoid multiline strings.

Required keys and allowed values:

- `id` (required): `EP-YYYYMMDD-NNN` (must match the filename ID)
- `title` (required): short, action-oriented title
- `status` (required): `planned | active | paused | done | archived`
- `kind` (required): `feature | refactor | bugfix | migration | infra | spike | perf | docs | tests`
- `domain` (required): `backend | frontend | console | infra | cross-cutting`
- `owner` (required): `@handle` (e.g. codex)
- `created` (required): `YYYY-MM-DD`
- `updated` (required): `YYYY-MM-DD` (must be bumped when the plan is materially revised)
- `tags` (optional): short list of labels
- `touches` (optional): `api | db | ui | cli | agents | ops | security | tests | docs` (list)
- `risk` (optional): `low | med | high`
- `breaking` (optional): `true | false`
- `migration` (optional): `true | false`
- `links` (optional): map with keys like `issue`, `pr`, `docs`
- `depends_on` (optional): list of ExecPlan IDs this plan depends on
- `supersedes` (optional): list of ExecPlan IDs this plan replaces

Example front matter:

    ---
    id: EP-20260117-014
    title: "Refactor auth refresh flow"
    status: planned
    kind: refactor
    domain: backend
    owner: "@trevor"
    created: 2026-01-17
    updated: 2026-01-17
    tags: [auth, sessions]
    touches: [api, db]
    risk: med
    breaking: false
    migration: false
    links:
      issue: ""
      pr: ""
      docs: ""
    depends_on: []
    supersedes: []
    ---

## How to use ExecPlans and PLANS.md

When authoring an executable specification (ExecPlan), follow PLANS.md to the letter. If it is not in your context, refresh your memory by reading the entire PLANS.md file. Be thorough in reading (and re-reading) source material to produce an accurate specification. When creating a spec, start from the skeleton and flesh it out as you do your research. Create the spec within `.agent/exec_plans/<short-slug>/`.

When implementing an executable specification (ExecPlan), do not prompt the user for "next steps"; simply proceed to the next milestone. Keep all sections up to date, add or split entries in the list at every stopping point to affirmatively state the progress made and next steps. Resolve ambiguities autonomously, and commit frequently.

When discussing an executable specification (ExecPlan), record decisions in a log in the spec for posterity; it should be unambiguously clear why any change to the specification was made. ExecPlans are living documents, and it should always be possible to restart from only the ExecPlan and no other work.

When researching a design with challenging requirements or significant unknowns, use milestones to implement proof of concepts and toy implementations that validate feasibility. Read the source code of libraries by finding or acquiring them, research deeply, and include prototypes to guide a fuller implementation.

## Requirements

NON-NEGOTIABLE REQUIREMENTS:

- Every ExecPlan must be fully self-contained. Self-contained means that in its current form it contains all knowledge and instructions needed for a novice to succeed.
- Every ExecPlan is a living document. Contributors are required to revise it as progress is made, as discoveries occur, and as design decisions are finalized. Each revision must remain fully self-contained.
- Every ExecPlan must enable a complete novice to implement the feature end-to-end without prior knowledge of this repo.
- Every ExecPlan must produce a demonstrably working behavior, not merely code changes to "meet a definition".
- Every ExecPlan must define every term of art in plain language or do not use it.

Purpose and intent come first. Begin by explaining, in a few sentences, why the work matters from a user's perspective: what someone can do after this change that they could not do before, and how to see it working. Then guide the reader through the exact steps to achieve that outcome, including what to edit, what to run, and what they should observe.

The agent executing your plan can list files, read files, search, run the project, and run tests. It does not know any prior context and cannot infer what you meant from earlier milestones. Repeat any assumption you rely on. Do not point to external blogs or docs; if knowledge is required, embed it in the plan itself in your own words. If an ExecPlan builds upon a prior ExecPlan and that file is checked in, incorporate it by reference. If it is not, you must include all relevant context from that plan.

## Formatting

Format and envelope are simple and strict.

1) YAML front matter is required and must be first.

The ExecPlan must begin with the YAML front matter described above. It is part of the plan and must remain accurate. When the plan is materially revised, update the `updated` date and record key decisions in the `Decision Log`.

2) ExecPlan body format.

Each ExecPlan must be one single fenced code block labeled as `md` that begins and ends with triple backticks. Do not nest additional triple-backtick code fences inside. When you need to show commands, transcripts, diffs, or code, present them as indented blocks within that single fence. Use indentation for clarity rather than code fences inside an ExecPlan to avoid prematurely closing the ExecPlan's code fence. Use two newlines after every heading, use `#` and `##` and so on, and correct syntax for ordered and unordered lists.

When writing an ExecPlan to a Markdown (.md) file where the content of the file is only the single ExecPlan, you should omit the triple backticks. The YAML front matter still remains at the top of the file.

Write in plain prose. Prefer sentences over lists. Avoid checklists, tables, and long enumerations unless brevity would obscure meaning. Checklists are permitted only in the `Progress` section, where they are mandatory. Narrative sections must remain prose-first.

## Guidelines

Self-containment and plain language are paramount. If you introduce a phrase that is not ordinary English ("daemon", "middleware", "RPC gateway", "filter graph"), define it immediately and remind the reader how it manifests in this repository (for example, by naming the files or commands where it appears). Do not say "as defined previously" or "according to the architecture doc." Include the needed explanation here, even if you repeat yourself.

Avoid common failure modes. Do not rely on undefined jargon. Do not describe "the letter of a feature" so narrowly that the resulting code compiles but does nothing meaningful. Do not outsource key decisions to the reader. When ambiguity exists, resolve it in the plan itself and explain why you chose that path. Err on the side of over-explaining user-visible effects and under-specifying incidental implementation details.

Anchor the plan with observable outcomes. State what the user can do after implementation, the commands to run, and the outputs they should see. Acceptance should be phrased as behavior a human can verify ("after starting the server, navigating to http://localhost:8080/health returns HTTP 200 with body OK") rather than internal attributes ("added a HealthCheck struct"). If a change is internal, explain how its impact can still be demonstrated (for example, by running tests that fail before and pass after, and by showing a scenario that uses the new behavior).

Specify repository context explicitly. Name files with full repository-relative paths, name functions and modules precisely, and describe where new files should be created. If touching multiple areas, include a short orientation paragraph that explains how those parts fit together so a novice can navigate confidently. When running commands, show the working directory and exact command line. When outcomes depend on environment, state the assumptions and provide alternatives when reasonable.

Be idempotent and safe. Write the steps so they can be run multiple times without causing damage or drift. If a step can fail halfway, include how to retry or adapt. If a migration or destructive operation is necessary, spell out backups or safe fallbacks. Prefer additive, testable changes that can be validated as you go.

Validation is not optional. Include instructions to run tests, to start the system if applicable, and to observe it doing something useful. Describe comprehensive testing for any new features or capabilities. Include expected outputs and error messages so a novice can tell success from failure. Where possible, show how to prove that the change is effective beyond compilation (for example, through a small end-to-end scenario, a CLI invocation, or an HTTP request/response transcript). State the exact test commands appropriate to the project’s toolchain and how to interpret their results.

Capture evidence. When your steps produce terminal output, short diffs, or logs, include them inside the single fenced block as indented examples. Keep them concise and focused on what proves success. If you need to include a patch, prefer file-scoped diffs or small excerpts that a reader can recreate by following your instructions rather than pasting large blobs.

## Milestones

Milestones are narrative, not bureaucracy. If you break the work into milestones, introduce each with a brief paragraph that describes the scope, what will exist at the end of the milestone that did not exist before, the commands to run, and the acceptance you expect to observe. Keep it readable as a story: goal, work, result, proof. Progress and milestones are distinct: milestones tell the story, progress tracks granular work. Both must exist. Never abbreviate a milestone merely for the sake of brevity; do not leave out details that could be crucial to a future implementation.

Each milestone must be independently verifiable and incrementally implement the overall goal of the execution plan.

### Milestone IDs and filenames

Milestones are associated to ExecPlans via the ExecPlan ID.

Milestone ID format:

- `EP-YYYYMMDD-NNN/MS###` (per-plan sequence, zero-padded)

Milestone filename format:

- `.agent/exec_plans/<short-slug>/milestones/active/EP-YYYYMMDD-NNN_MS###_<short-slug>.md`
- Archive to: `.agent/exec_plans/<short-slug>/milestones/archive/YYYY/MM/DD/EP-YYYYMMDD-NNN_MS###_<short-slug>.md`

### Instructions for Creating Milestones

- Base your milestone on the template shown in `.agent/templates/MILESTONE_TEMPLATE.md`.
- Create your milestone within `.agent/exec_plans/<short-slug>/milestones/active/`.
- When your milestone is complete, archive it in `.agent/exec_plans/<short-slug>/milestones/archive/`.

## Living plans and design decisions

- ExecPlans are living documents. As you make key design decisions, update the plan to record both the decision and the thinking behind it. Record all decisions in the `Decision Log` section.
- ExecPlans must contain and maintain a `Progress` section, a `Surprises & Discoveries` section, a `Decision Log`, and an `Outcomes & Retrospective` section. These are not optional.
- When you discover optimizer behavior, performance tradeoffs, unexpected bugs, or inverse/unapply semantics that shaped your approach, capture those observations in the `Surprises & Discoveries` section with short evidence snippets (test output is ideal).
- If you change course mid-implementation, document why in the `Decision Log` and reflect the implications in `Progress`.
- At completion of a major task or the full plan, write an `Outcomes & Retrospective` entry summarizing what was achieved, what remains, and lessons learned.

## Prototyping milestones and parallel implementations

It is acceptable—and often encouraged—to include explicit prototyping milestones when they de-risk a larger change. Examples: adding a low-level operator to a dependency to validate feasibility, or exploring two composition orders while measuring optimizer effects. Keep prototypes additive and testable. Clearly label the scope as "prototyping"; describe how to run and observe results; and state the criteria for promoting or discarding the prototype.

Prefer additive code changes followed by subtractions that keep tests passing. Parallel implementations (e.g., keeping an adapter alongside an older path during migration) are fine when they reduce risk or enable tests to continue passing during a large migration. Describe how to validate both paths and how to retire one safely with tests. When working with multiple new libraries or feature areas, consider creating spikes that evaluate feasibility independently, proving that the external library performs as expected and implements the features needed in isolation.

## Skeleton of a Good ExecPlan

```md
---
id: EP-YYYYMMDD-NNN
title: "<Short, action-oriented title>"
status: planned
kind: feature
domain: backend
owner: "@handle-or-team"
created: YYYY-MM-DD
updated: YYYY-MM-DD
tags: []
touches: []
risk: low
breaking: false
migration: false
links:
  issue: ""
  pr: ""
  docs: ""
depends_on: []
supersedes: []
---

# <Short, action-oriented description>

This ExecPlan is a living document. The sections `Progress`, `Surprises & Discoveries`, `Decision Log`, and `Outcomes & Retrospective` must be kept up to date as work proceeds.

If PLANS.md is checked into the repo, reference the path to that file here from the repository root and note that this document must be maintained in accordance with PLANS.md.

## Purpose / Big Picture

Explain in a few sentences what someone gains after this change and how they can see it working. State the user-visible behavior you will enable.

## Progress

Use a list with checkboxes to summarize granular steps. Every stopping point must be documented here, even if it requires splitting a partially completed task into two ("done" vs. "remaining"). This section must always reflect the actual current state of the work.

- [x] (2025-10-01 13:00Z) Example completed step.
- [ ] Example incomplete step.
- [ ] Example partially completed step (completed: X; remaining: Y).

Use timestamps to measure rates of progress.

## Surprises & Discoveries

Document unexpected behaviors, bugs, optimizations, or insights discovered during implementation. Provide concise evidence.

- Observation: …
  Evidence: …

## Decision Log

Record every decision made while working on the plan in the format:

- Decision: …
  Rationale: …
  Date/Author: …

## Outcomes & Retrospective

Summarize outcomes, gaps, and lessons learned at major milestones or at completion. Compare the result against the original purpose.

## Context and Orientation

Describe the current state relevant to this task as if the reader knows nothing. Name the key files and modules by full path. Define any non-obvious term you will use. Do not refer to prior plans.

## Plan of Work

Describe, in prose, the sequence of edits and additions. For each edit, name the file and location (function, module) and what to insert or change. Keep it concrete and minimal.

## Concrete Steps

State the exact commands to run and where to run them (working directory). When a command generates output, show a short expected transcript so the reader can compare. This section must be updated as work proceeds.

## Validation and Acceptance

Describe how to start or exercise the system and what to observe. Phrase acceptance as behavior, with specific inputs and outputs. If tests are involved, say "run <project’s test command> and expect <N> passed; the new test <name> fails before the change and passes after>".

## Idempotence and Recovery

If steps can be repeated safely, say so. If a step is risky, provide a safe retry or rollback path. Keep the environment clean after completion.

## Artifacts and Notes

Include the most important transcripts, diffs, or snippets as indented examples. Keep them concise and focused on what proves success.

## Interfaces and Dependencies

Be prescriptive. Name the libraries, modules, and services to use and why. Specify the types, traits/interfaces, and function signatures that must exist at the end of the milestone. Prefer stable names and paths such as `crate::module::function` or `package.submodule.Interface`.

Example:

In crates/foo/planner.rs, define:

    pub trait Planner {
        fn plan(&self, observed: &Observed) -> Vec<Action>;
    }

---

When you revise a plan, you must ensure your changes are comprehensively reflected across all sections, including the living document sections. Update the YAML `updated` date, add an entry to `Decision Log` when appropriate, and write a short note at the bottom of the plan describing the change and the reason why.
